Add ClickHouse destination docs (#36923)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/observability_pipelines/destinations/clickhouse.md

---
title: ClickHouse Destination
description: Learn how to configure the ClickHouse destination.
disable_toc: false
products:
- name: Logs
  icon: logs
  url: /observability_pipelines/configuration/?tab=logs#pipeline-types
further_reading:
- link: "/observability_pipelines/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Observability Pipelines"
---

{{< product-availability >}}

## Overview

Use Observability Pipelines' ClickHouse destination to send logs to a [ClickHouse][1] server over the HTTP interface. The destination supports JSON insert formats for mapping events to columns by name or storing raw payloads, and Apache Arrow IPC streaming for higher-throughput inserts.

## Prerequisites

Before you configure the ClickHouse destination, you must have:

- A running ClickHouse server that the Observability Pipelines Worker can access using the [HTTP interface][2].
- A ClickHouse database and target table to which the Worker sends events.
- (Optional) Credentials for a ClickHouse user that has `INSERT` permission on the target table. The Worker authenticates with HTTP basic authentication.

> - (Optional) TLS material if your ClickHouse server requires HTTPS with client certificates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (Optional) TLS certificates if your ClickHouse server requires HTTPS with client certificates.
```

1. In the **Table** field, enter the name of the ClickHouse table to insert events into.
1. In the **Format** dropdown menu, select the insert format for events:
    - `json_each_row` (default): Inserts each event as a JSON object on its own line. Event fields are mapped to columns of the same name. This maps to ClickHouse's [`JSONEachRow`][7] format.
    - `json_as_object`: Inserts each event into a single `JSON`-typed column. This maps to ClickHouse's [`JSONAsObject`][8] format.
    - `json_as_string`: Inserts each event into a single `String`-typed column, storing the raw JSON. This maps to ClickHouse's [`JSONAsString`][9] format.
    - `arrow_stream`: Batches events using the Apache Arrow IPC streaming format. When you select this format, you must also configure [Enable batching](#enable-batching).

    **Note**: When you use `arrow_stream`, your ClickHouse server must be reachable when your worker loads the pipeline configuration from the remote configuration backend, or upon worker restart. The Clickhouse table schema is not persisted between restarts.

### Optional settings

#### Skip unknown fields

> Toggle the **Skip unknown fields** switch to either **Drop Unknown Fields** or **Fail On Unknown Fields**  that are not present in the target table schema instead of returning an insert error. The default is **Use ClickHouse Server**, which uses the [`input_format_skip_unknown_fields`][10] setting.

Reviewer: I see a dropdown menu in the UI and not a toggle.

```suggestion
In the **Skip unknown fields** dropdown menu, select either **Drop Unknown Fields** or **Fail On Unknown Fields** for fields that are not present in the target table schema instead of returning an insert error. The default is **Use ClickHouse Server**, which uses the [`input_format_skip_unknown_fields`][10] setting.
```

#### Date time best effort

> Toggle the **Date time best effort** switch to enable flexible `DateTime` parsing on the ClickHouse server. When enabled, the server accepts a wider range of date and time string formats. See ClickHouse's [`date_time_input_format`][11] setting for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Toggle **Date time best effort** to enable flexible `DateTime` parsing on the ClickHouse server. When enabled, the server accepts a wider range of date and time string formats. See ClickHouse's [`date_time_input_format`][11] setting for more information.
```

#### Compression

Toggle **Enable Compression** to compress outbound HTTP requests with gzip. You can optionally set the **Compression level** to an integer from `1` (fastest) to `9` (best compression). If left unset, the default is `6`.

#### Enable TLS

{{% observability_pipelines/tls_settings %}}

#### Enable batching

> Batch encoding is required when **Format** is set to `arrow_stream` and optional for JSON formats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Batch encoding is required when **Format** is set to `arrow_stream` and is optional for JSON formats.

Toggle **Enable batching** for batch encoding.
```

> 1. (Optional) Toggle **Allow nullable fields** to allow `null` values for non-nullable columns in the target table. When this setting is off (default), missing values for non-nullable columns results in encoding errors.

Reviewer: I didn't catch this last time, but it seems like `Allow nullable fields` should be its own section after "Enable batching"? I'd also remove`(Optional)` since this is under the "Optional settings" section.

Author: https://vector.dev/docs/reference/configuration/sinks/clickhouse/#batch_encoding.allow_nullable_fields

It's a little weird in the UI right now, but this is actually nested under the batch settings, so this is actually in the right place.

1. (Optional) In the **Max events** field, enter the maximum number of events per batch. Must be `1` or greater.

> 1. (Optional) In the **Timeout (secs)** field, enter the maximum time, in seconds, before a partial batch is flushed. Must be between `1` and `65535`. If left unset, the default is 1 second.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the **Max events** field, enter the maximum number of events per batch. Must be `1` or greater.
1. In the **Timeout (secs)** field, enter the maximum time, in seconds, before a partial batch is flushed. Must be between `1` and `65535`. If left unset, the default is 1 second.
```

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Secrets Management" %}}

- ClickHouse HTTP endpoint URL identifier:
    - References the HTTP interface endpoint of your ClickHouse server.
    - The default identifier is `DESTINATION_CLICKHOUSE_ENDPOINT_URL`.
- ClickHouse username identifier (when basic auth is enabled):
    - The default identifier is `DESTINATION_CLICKHOUSE_USERNAME`.
- ClickHouse password identifier (when basic auth is enabled):
    - The default identifier is `DESTINATION_CLICKHOUSE_PASSWORD`.
- ClickHouse TLS passphrase identifier (when TLS is enabled with an encrypted private key):
    - The default identifier is `DESTINATION_CLICKHOUSE_KEY_PASS`.

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Environment Variables" %}}

{{% observability_pipelines/configure_existing_pipelines/destination_env_vars/clickhouse %}}

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## How the destination works

### Event batching

A batch of events is flushed when one of these parameters is met. Batching is also configurable for this destination. See [event batching][12] for more information.

| Maximum Events | Maximum Bytes | Timeout (seconds) |
|----------------|---------------|-------------------|

> | No limit       | 10 MB         | 1                 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| None           | 10 MB         | 1                 |
```

---

> title: ClickHouse Destination

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: ClickHouse Destination
description: Learn how to configure the ClickHouse destination.
```

disable_toc: false
products:
- name: Logs
  icon: logs
  url: /observability_pipelines/configuration/?tab=logs#pipeline-types
further_reading:
- link: "/observability_pipelines/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Observability Pipelines"
---

{{< product-availability >}}

## Overview

Use Observability Pipelines' ClickHouse destination to send logs to a [ClickHouse][1] server over the HTTP interface. The destination supports JSON insert formats for mapping events to columns by name or storing raw payloads, and Apache Arrow IPC streaming for higher-throughput inserts.

## Prerequisites

Before you configure the ClickHouse destination, you must have:

> - A running ClickHouse server reachable from the Observability Pipelines Worker over the [HTTP interface][2].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A running ClickHouse server that the Observability Pipelines Worker can access using the [HTTP interface][2].
```

> - A database and target table where events are inserted. The destination does not create the database or table for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A ClickHouse database and target table to which the Worker sends events.
```

> - (Optional) Credentials for a ClickHouse user that has `INSERT` permission on the target table. The destination authenticates with HTTP Basic auth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (Optional) Credentials for a ClickHouse user that has `INSERT` permission on the target table. The Worker authenticates with HTTP basic authentication.
```

- (Optional) TLS material if your ClickHouse server requires HTTPS with client certificates.

## Setup

Configure the ClickHouse destination when you [set up a pipeline][3]. You can set up a pipeline in the [UI][4], using the [API][5], or with [Terraform][6]. The steps in this section are configured in the UI.

<div class="alert alert-danger">Only enter the identifiers for the ClickHouse endpoint URL and, if applicable, the username, password, and TLS key pass. Do <b>not</b> enter the actual values.</div>

After you select the ClickHouse destination in the pipeline UI:

> 1. Enter the identifier for your ClickHouse HTTP endpoint URL. If you leave it blank, the [default](#secret-defaults) is used.

Reviewer: There's also the Username Key and Password Key fields in the UI after the Endpoint URL Key.

> 1. In the **Table** field, enter the name of the ClickHouse table to insert events into. This field is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the **Table** field, enter the name of the ClickHouse table to insert events into.
```

> 1. (Optional) In the **Database** field, enter the name of the ClickHouse database that contains the table. If you leave it blank, the ClickHouse user's default database is used.

Reviewer: This field is before the Table field in the UI.

1. In the **Format** dropdown menu, select the insert format for events:
    - `json_each_row` (default): Inserts each event as a JSON object on its own line. Event fields are mapped to columns of the same name. This maps to ClickHouse's [`JSONEachRow`][7] format.
    - `json_as_object`: Inserts each event into a single `JSON`-typed column. This maps to ClickHouse's [`JSONAsObject`][8] format.
    - `json_as_string`: Inserts each event into a single `String`-typed column, storing the raw JSON. This maps to ClickHouse's [`JSONAsString`][9] format.
    - `arrow_stream`: Batches events using the Apache Arrow IPC streaming format. When you select this format, you must also configure [Batch encoding](#batch-encoding).

### Optional settings

#### Skip unknown fields

> Toggle the **Skip unknown fields** switch to drop event fields that are not present in the target table schema instead of returning an insert error. When this setting is left unset, the ClickHouse server's [`input_format_skip_unknown_fields`][10] setting applies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Toggle the **Skip unknown fields** switch to either **Drop Unknown Fields** or **Fail On Unknown Fields**  that are not present in the target table schema instead of returning an insert error. The default is **Use ClickHouse Server**, which uses the [`input_format_skip_unknown_fields`][10] setting.
```

#### Date time best effort

Toggle the **Date time best effort** switch to enable flexible `DateTime` parsing on the ClickHouse server. When enabled, the server accepts a wider range of date and time string formats. See ClickHouse's [`date_time_input_format`][11] setting for more information.

#### Compression

In the **Compression** dropdown menu, select the algorithm used to compress outbound HTTP requests:
- `gzip` (default): Compresses requests with gzip.
- `none`: Sends requests uncompressed.

> When you select `gzip`, you can optionally set the **Compression level** to an integer from `1` (fastest) to `9` (best compression). If left unset, the algorithm's default level is used.

Reviewer: What's the default level?

> #### Enable basic authentication

Reviewer: I'm not seeing this in the UI.

Toggle the **Enable Basic Auth** switch to authenticate to ClickHouse with HTTP Basic auth.

1. Enter the identifier for your ClickHouse username. If you leave it blank, the [default](#secret-defaults) is used.
1. Enter the identifier for your ClickHouse password. If you leave it blank, the [default](#secret-defaults) is used.

#### Enable TLS

{{% observability_pipelines/tls_settings %}}

> #### Batch encoding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Enable batching
```

> Batch encoding is required when **Format** is set to `arrow_stream`. It is not used with the JSON formats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Batch encoding is required when **Format** is set to `arrow_stream` and optional for JSON formats.
```

> 1. In the **Codec** dropdown menu, select `arrow_stream`.

Reviewer: I don't see the Codec dropdown menu.

> 1. (Optional) Toggle **Allow nullable fields** to allow `null` values for non-nullable columns in the target table. When this setting is off (default), missing values for non-nullable columns cause encoding errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. (Optional) Toggle **Allow nullable fields** to allow `null` values for non-nullable columns in the target table. When this setting is off (default), missing values for non-nullable columns results in encoding errors.
```

> **Note**: When you use `arrow_stream`, your ClickHouse server must be reachable at the time the pipeline starts because the target table's schema is read from the server to build the Arrow encoder.

Reviewer: Does "..the pipeline starts.." means when the pipeline is created?

Also, I think this information should be up in the `Format` dropdown menu section.

```suggestion
**Note**: When you use `arrow_stream`, your ClickHouse server must be reachable at the time the pipeline is created because the target table's schema is read from the server to build the Arrow encoder.
```

Author: Added some clarification here to this behavior. The Clickhouse table schema does actually have to be fetched every time the worker's config reloads (when a user deploys a new config, or the worker restarts).

> #### Batching

Reviewer: Isn't this part of the above "Enable batching" section? I would combine the below steps with that section's steps.

1. (Optional) In the **Timeout (secs)** field, enter the maximum time, in seconds, before a partial batch is flushed. Must be between `1` and `65535`. If left unset, the default is 1 second.

See [Event batching](#event-batching) for more information.

## Secret defaults

{{% observability_pipelines/set_secrets_intro %}}

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Secrets Management" %}}

- ClickHouse HTTP endpoint URL identifier:
    - References the HTTP interface endpoint of your ClickHouse server.
    - The default identifier is `DESTINATION_CLICKHOUSE_ENDPOINT_URL`.
- ClickHouse username identifier (when basic auth is enabled):
    - The default identifier is `DESTINATION_CLICKHOUSE_USERNAME`.
- ClickHouse password identifier (when basic auth is enabled):
    - The default identifier is `DESTINATION_CLICKHOUSE_PASSWORD`.
- ClickHouse TLS passphrase identifier (when TLS is enabled with an encrypted private key):
    - The default identifier is `DESTINATION_CLICKHOUSE_KEY_PASS`.

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Environment Variables" %}}

{{% observability_pipelines/configure_existing_pipelines/destination_env_vars/clickhouse %}}

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## How the destination works

### Event batching

> A batch of events is flushed when one of the configured parameters is met. See [event batching][12] for more information.

Reviewer: Going to use the same wording as other docs:

```suggestion
A batch of events is flushed when one of these parameters is met. Batching is also configurable for this destination. See [event batching][12] for more information.
```

> | Maximum Events | Timeout (seconds) |

Reviewer: I think we put default batching numbers here, for example: https://docs.datadoghq.com/observability_pipelines/destinations/splunk_hec?tab=secretsmanagement#event-batching
